And where were you born? In Rollins, Wyoming, on
July 17, 1930. And where were your parents born? My
mother was born in Hakona, in Michoacan, and my
father in La Barca, Jalisco. My father in 1894, and
my mother in 1900, but that must never be revealed.
And she left Mexico, I believe. Now, I'm unclear as
to the year. I think it was 1913. My father left in
1919. And where did they meet? In my hometown of
Rollins, Wyoming. My father was working for the
Union Pacific Railroad at the time, and my mother
had been widowed three years before she remarried
my father. And I've just only learned that my
father knew her while she was still married to her
first husband, which is something I hadn't
realized before. I would say roughly about 1925, I
suppose, is when they met, and then we married in
1929. I was the first born at that moment. Now, what
was your mother's name? Guadalupe Navarro.
Guadalupe Navarro.
She was 13, let's see, she would have been 13 years
old in 1913. Now, did she ever tell the story of how
she and her family happened to leave Mexico? Yeah,
I think that, first of all, her older brother had
migrated to the United States a few years earlier
and homesteaded a ranch in Wyoming. And then when
the Revolution came with all the problems, rather
than stay there with the violence, Apparently my
grandmother decided to move to Wyoming where her
son was. And so my mother, my grandmother, made a
trip sometime before 1913 to come up to Wyoming and
see what the situation was. Then she returned to
Mexico and brought my mother and two of her
grandchildren who had been born and abandoned by
an elder daughter. And so the four of them made the
trip home without us. And your grandfather was no
longer living? No, my grandfather died in 1923,
but my mother's grandfather separated from him
for reasons which are unclear to me. But it's
always struck me as a bit strange that she would
leave her husband to go to her son. But it's not
really strange because her husband, my mother's
father, was her second husband. Her first husband
had died. His name was Emiliano Javitegui. It's a
is a Basque derivation, . Well, anyhow. So this was
. Yeah. They met and married. Apparently, yeah. I
know very little, very unclear.
Then she married again, and- My mother was born to
the marriage. Was it in 1913 that she left her
husband to go to the States? Apparently so, yeah.
Well, whatever happened to him, to your
grandfather? He died in 1923, natural causes.
What was his name? What was his name? I don't know
his first name. His last name, I don't know. No
father. Yeah. I'm sure my mother's told me I forgot
him. But he stayed there in the church? Yes, yeah.
And according to my mother, he stayed, I suppose,
because he didn't want to play second fiddle to his
eldest stepson, probably. But he apparently
wasn't disturbed by the violence that was life in
Mexico at the time. And mom says that he himself had
experienced threats. One of the stories she tells
about Mexicans, she has very little opinion of
Mexicans, even though she was out there as
although she's nationalized in Massachusetts,
is that the violence was just unbelievable. That
apparently,
during the early phase of the revolution, she
interposed with her body a pistol that was
threatening her. And she doesn't like me being in
El Paso because it's too close to Mexico and Mexico
didn't believe that. And so I think this sort of
indicates her attitude toward Mexico. It's one in
which she sees violence everywhere. And this, you
think, comes out of her experiences during the
first two or three years of the revolution. She
tells stories about la vistas y los casancistas.
And I don't know if these are firsthand, because I
get the idea that Villa and... and Carranza didn't
have their fallout until after she left the
country. No, they wouldn't have. Yeah, you see,
and therefore, some of this may be hearsay, but
anyhow, she tells about, you know, she recites a
little poem to me. When the vistas would take the
village, they'd say, are you vistas? And the poor
people would say, well, we're neither vistas nor
carancistas, just poor workers, you know. But
there was a little rhyme, which sounds very
enchanting in Spanish, which I've forgotten it.
But this, I think, is the atmosphere that she
conjures when she thinks of Mexico, and why she's
reluctant to go back, and reluctant to have her
children identify very much with Mexico, where
Americans is what she's concerned. And she has
never been back since 1913? No, she went back in
19... When did I say her father died? 1923? Mm-hmm.
Yeah. So she went back prior, a year or two before he
died. That's the only business she's been in ever
since. So it would be, she left in 1913, was back
within 10 years, and has returned.
And when I press her, you know, I myself really
wasn't too concerned with my Mexican background
until I suppose I was an adult. And when I do ask her
questions,
I was very young, and I don't remember. But these
things do come out in informal conversations when
she's not a daughter. For example, the reason Ed
Leonard may have mentioned you to you was I
remarked to him that at Christmas time, I got a
letter from Mom that she was in El Paso in 1913,
something like this. And apparently, on that
trip, she relayed this at a different time. The
train on which they were riding had been derailed
or stopped for some reason. And so she and my
cousins and my grandmother walked for several
days. And she tells me about how my grandmother
would put a handkerchief in pools of water they had
collected so she could drink the water without
getting the impediments that had been there. And
that finally, they were rescued by Villa's troops
to the extent that a cavalry detachment
apparently came on them as they were walking
across and directed them to a rail point at which
there was a train waiting or was going to come and
pick them up. And so her opinion of Villa is very
high because she associates this cavalry
detachment with them. And she tells the story of
how my grandmother went to the captain of the
detachment. My mother then was just obviously in
her puberty. And told the captain that, you know,
her daughter was, you know, she didn't want the
soldiers molesting her. And the captain... let me
know that she would not be molested, or he posted
the guard. I can't remember who it was, you know, to
prevent her from being molested, which is another
reason that she could explain her high regard for
the idea of being molested. But this is the sum
total of my recollections from the millennium,
except the recollection about how nice it was to
have certain kinds of fruit in Mexico over the wine
season, in this case. Now, what did your
grandfather do in Hacona? What was his
occupation? He was apparently a clerk, but a
white-collar worker in a store. Now, Mom is very
proud of her Spanish ancestry and says that he
came, he apparently, I asked her point-blank
whether he came from Spain. She didn't know, but
she was always pointing out that he was, you know, a
Spaniard. It's the wrong thing to admit to these
days, but at that time, she's very proud to have it,
still is. And she didn't know. She said that if he
hadn't come over from Spain himself, he was the
firstborn of parents who had come from Spain, in
the same way I am the firstborn of parents who came
from Mexico. But he was, apparently, a
white-collar worker. She's always been very
proud that he could read, write, calculate. She'd
say, my father could add figures in his head. She
was very proud of his occupation or his skill,
which I suppose at that time was something to be
proud of. My grandmother was uneducated, I think.
So she doesn't talk about your grandmother's
background? No. Apparently, my grandmother
married I don't know why she married my
grandfather, but apparently the big love in her
life was her first life with Miñanito, because I
can remember listening to Miñanito this,
Miñanito that, you know, all the time I was growing
up. I would never have messed with my own
grandfather. And so I have a hunch that it must have
been a marriage or something, you know, that she
needed someone to help her raise a family or for
financial reasons. Now, let's see, do I have your,
your grandfather's name was? Navarro. Navarro.
Oh, that's right. Navarro. Now, you may be
confused because I said my grandmother's first
husband was in How They Can Eat. Right. That's her
first husband.
Now, after going to Wyoming, what did your
grandmother do? Apparently, she worked. She took
in washing.
She cooked in either a boarding house or a
restaurant. I don't know. Until, I guess she did
that until her own children had gotten jobs and
were married and caught supporting her. And then
she lived with their assistants until she died in
1953, the age of 94 years.
Now, your mother married... Her first husband.
Her first husband. Who was he? His name was Manuel
Ayala. He
was also of Mexican descent, but I believe he was
born in the United States. I'm not that sure. And he
was, he worked on the railroad in the roundhouse,
if that makes any sense to you. apparently helped
keep the machinery in running order. I suppose a
mechanic of sorts, I'm not sure what the technical
name is. And this was shortly after she got to
Wyoming? No, she married him in 1919. So it was a
period of six years from the time she went home
until she married at the age of 19. And she helped my
grandmother take the Russians. Apparently she
started schooling now. My grandmother took her
out into third grade because She happened to be
walking with a boy, and my grandmother thought
this was something a young lady shouldn't do, so
she pulled her out of school and kept her on the very
close of her bed until she married her first
husband. And she had four children by that
marriage. Four children by that marriage. And
then she married your father. Yes. Her first
husband died. Died. He died in 1927 of... The
physician who operated on him for tonsils
apparently cut an artery. Yeah, that's right. My
mother's first husband, probably her life died,
and she's never found a way to replace him, even
though she'd been married to him. Then she married
my father, I think in 1929, and I was born in 30, and
there were three children from that time. There
were four children, and one of them died. What was
your father's first name? Jesus Jose Gomez.
And the children were? Me, Rudolph, and I had a
younger brother named Ruben, and he had all the
names that had been emphasized, you know, except
my own in the birth certificate. Now, your father,
Jesus, you say left Mexico in 1919. Yes. Where was
he from? He was from La Barca in Jalisco. And? All I
know about his background is that he, I think he was
a woodcutter's son and a woodcutter himself in
Mexico until the revolution came along. And then
his activities during the revolution are very
unclear. Now, I've heard rumors to the effect that
he had a wife who was over in Mexico. and that either
abandoned them or were separated from them from
the revolution. I don't know. This is hearsay. But
I have a hunch it's probably accurate, you know.
And I hope there's never going to be another way to
forgive me. But I have a hunch that it's accurate. I
just, I don't know. And it's only been very
recently that I know from a pretty reliable
source, which is the first cousin, that
apparently he was somehow supportive of Villa's
effort in northern Mexico. But this is hearsay
evidence. I don't know. I can recall my father
talking with his friends also from Mexico about
the revolution and talking about how they would do
this, how to bury the dead and how they would be sure
to take the shoes from the dead before they're
buried and this kind of thing. But no account which
could be historically accurate of what he did for
those years of the revolution. I have a much better
picture of what my uncle, Alveño, always did. He
was one of Villa's men and was with Villa when they
raided Columbus, New Mexico in 1950. This is your
father's brother? My father's brother, Aurelio.
A-U-R-E-L-L-I-O.
And he was in the detachment that raided Columbus,
New Mexico in 1950, and was also with Villa when
they were being chased by Pershing. And he used to
recount the story of how they surprised the
American detachment and took their uniforms from
them and returned them to the United States in
their long underwear. And he says, you'll never
read about that in an American history book. And
the fact that he said this long before I was very
prideful of my Mexican heritage leads me to
believe it was probably an accurate statement.
And it's true. I've never read about it in American
history. No, I haven't either. But he said they did
this. They caught this detachment, didn't want to
kill them. They were in that trouble. Took the
uniforms, the firearms, gave them their horses,
and sent them back to town in their underwear,
which would be hilarious. Yeah. So I have a hunch
that he was probably one of Eden's regularers. But
again, I didn't have enough presence of mine. I was
very young. He died in 1943. I didn't have enough
presence or enough sense of history to really
probe. And so it's lost. It's terrible. Well, now,
when did he come to? I presume this was in Wyoming?
Yeah. He and my father worked together on Union
Pacific Railroad. And I have a hunch they probably
crossed My father, he and my father worked
together on the railroad until, I suppose, my
father married my mother. And then my Uncle
Aurelio finally located in Longmont, Colorado,
and worked there in the farms until 1941 or 42 when
he contracted tuberculosis, or had been
suffering from it anyhow. He came to Wyoming in
1941. He was living with my father at the time of
Pearl Harbor up there. This is how I dated. We all
remember what happened on Joe Harmon. So he was
living with my father in 1941, and he lived with him
until he died in 1943.
And as I say, by the time I knew him, he was a very
gaunt man, very wasted. But I have a cousin who
tells me that at the time he was working with my
father and my uncle, my grandfather was
distinguished by the fact that he was so tall. very
strappy. But this was long before I knew either,
long before I knew my father. Now your
grandfather's on your father's side. No? Yes, I
know nothing about him. I know his name. What's his
name? Sin Poroso. I take that to be
S-I-N-F-O-R-O-S-O. Sin Poroso Gomez.
I know nothing about him. except that he was, I
think, a woodcutter, because my father talked
about going, taking the mule, and cutting wood,
and coming back, and all this kind of stuff. I don't
know a thing about my grandmother, except at one
time, my father was very ill. She stole into an
hacienda and stole some oranges from the trees. He
would repeat this about how his mother really
loved him. So I have a hunch there was a pretty hard
life, much harder life for my father than for my
mother. From for I believe to deduce that they were
probably considered to be lower middle class. My
father was just complete . But yet he was, I think,
probably, he taught himself to read or was taught.
He had some schooling because he could read
Spanish. That's his book up there.
And he cut himself to read the English newspapers
at home so he could keep up with the news. But I
thought I had a picture here. It was very strange to
me that neither one of my parents spoke much of
Mexico. Now, it may be that they've been away from
it for so long. But then there was the usual racial
prejudice in my hometown. And so it may have been
that they
How did your father happen to leave? Did he leave in
any way because of the revolution or did he just
leave?
It's difficult to say. I think probably there's a
combination of factors. I'm pretty well accepted
in my own mind that my uncle Adrian wasn't a beast.
And I think that my father was probably a vista of
the camp followers riot, you know, cooking, this
kind of thing, being a hostler or something. And
when Villa had lost, you know, in Salaya in 1915,
apparently there was this banding.
Excuse me. Hi. Hey. Come on, let's go to class. Oh,
excuse me, I'm... I just came by to see if you wanted
to go today. Oh, well, thank you very much. No, I've
got this. Hello, how are you? Hello. And... I think
it was probably the culmination of the tumult in
Mexico, the fact that he had been more or less
active. Excuse me, would you like a mask? Please
feel free. I think that may have had something to do
with it. And
the fact that there just wasn't anything
economically that he could do in Mexico, and as you
know, There's always been economic opportunity
inside of the Rio Grande. And I think probably
there's a combination of factors. But he never
said, I left Mexico because. It was when I left
Mexico. And it would be nice to go back and revisit
this kind of thing. But now that he's gone. I've had
a chance to reflect on all this. I'm the only member
of my family who's ever gone to college, you see.
And so a great deal of my interest is academic, you
know, since I've been exposed to some of this
myself. And I've puzzled over why they didn't talk
about their background and their families,
because it's a tremendous loss to us, not to know
much about ourselves. And I've never been able to
answer it satisfactorily for my father. For my
mother, I think that she was very conscious of
being an alien in Wyoming. wanted to make things as
easy for us as possible, so she insisted that we
speak English as quickly as we started in the
library, that we assimilate as rapidly as
possible, as she deprecated and downplayed our
Mexican background, which I think is regrettable
now. It's taken me 30 years to reach this point. But
my father was self-consciously proud of being a
Mexican. I can remember whenever anything
favorable about Mexico came up, he would always
bring to our attention in the newspaper. He would
tune in to Spanish radio broadcasts, this kind of
thing. I just don't know why he didn't speak with us
about it. Part of the reason may have been that he
and my mother didn't have a happy marriage. I
mentioned to my uncle, I read him living in my
father's house. They were separated practically
all my life. And so it may have been that You know,
when we were together, there were more immediate
things to talk about in his background. I just
don't know. I have often thought of going to Mexico
and see if I have, you know, see if I could locate my
family there. But I'm not half afraid to, you know,
because I'm not sure I really want to know. Here I
can romanticize and fantasize. It's probably
much more appealing the truth would be. But I don't
know. Now your father, he worked on the railroads.
Was he still working? How long, when did your
father die? He died in 1946. And was he still
working on the railroads? No,
he was working on the railroad as a section hand
when he met my mother. But before that he had done,
you know, the usual sorts of things that Mexican
immigrants do. He had been a sheep herder. He had to
pick beets in Colorado. He had worked in the
agricultural field in Stockton, California. He
had done some sort of work in Portland, Oregon. He
worked on the railroad in Auburn, Utah, and was on
the section in Wyoming where he met my mother. And
then in the mid-'30s, he contracted Rocky
Mountain Spotted Fever. And of course, it
couldn't work, so he lost his job at the railroad.
And at that time, they didn't have a workman's
compensation. So he lost his job. And he was hired
back by the railroad, I think in 1938 or 1939,
without any credit given him for the seniority
he'd already accumulated. So he was bitter about
that. And during the war, he had an opportunity to
work at the oil refinery in Rollins, Wyoming, or in
Sinclair, Wyoming, which is seven miles from the
hometown of Rollins. And he worked there from 1942
until his death in 1946. And your mother, what did
she do all these years when she was separated from
your father? Did he support you? He supported us.
She didn't work? She didn't work. She worked from
the time her first husband died until she married
my father. She worked as a janitor of a little
school there, a little sophomore school. She took
him washing and did, I suppose, what would be
maid's work. But she finished that when my father
died. or she quit that, apparently she married my
father, and didn't work during their marriage.
Now, during the time that he was ill, we were on
welfare. And this probably explains the reason
I'm a Democrat, and my father was a Roosevelt
Democrat, because we were held by the Spanish
program. And then she didn't work again until we
had all left home. We were all, I suppose, trying to
make our ends meet, And she worked for a while at the
hospital there at home as a cook, this kind of
thing. She remarried after my father died a third
time, a man named Percy Sanchez, who was of Mexican
descent, but he was born in Colorado, an American,
served in the American Army during the First World
War, and had a pretty good job for a Mexican
American in that he was a founder of Hatchfield.
Thank you. And he died, I can't remember, 1961, 62.
Anyhow, my mother is, her major source of income
today is his social security and whatever her
children can send her to.
Ah, now. Okay, well, I was saying
that that you know, her major source of income is
Social Security. And then, you know, I send her a
contribution each month. I think several of her
other children do. And then my sister lives in my
hometown, and she makes the biggest contribution
of all, which is looking after her, you know,
taking care of her. How old is your mother now? 74.
But she's not been in good health over the last four
years. So I suppose what I'm saying is that her
major source of money income is Social Security.
The psychic income is from my sister, and then the
in-between from the rest of the children, of which
seven are surviving. You said you were the only
one, seven. I hear that she only had seven. No, I
said that she had four Gomez children, but the
little girl died in 1934. I have a sister who died in
1934. Oh, okay. She had four Gomez children. Four
Gomez and four Ayala. One of the Gomez children
died. And then your brothers and sisters,
Rudolfo, that's you. Ruben, and how did you happen
to go to college? You said you were the only one who
had gone. I was only complete. I had an older
brother who went. That was one of the Alaya. Ayala.
Ayala. Yes. A-Y-A-L-A. I don't know. I've asked
myself that question. It's just the luck of the
draw. Some genes I got. My older brother got all the
business genes in the family. He's a very
successful realtor in Oregon. So it's genes I get.
Well, you were talking about prejudice in
Rollins, Wyoming. I don't have, in fact,
Wyoming's one of the few states I've only been to a
tiny bit. First of all, were there very many people
of Mexican origin in Wyoming? Yes, uh-huh. Yes, to
the extent my hometown, I think, probably the time
I was born in 1930, the time I was first conscious
of, the population probably varied from 4,000 to
5,000 people. Even now, it's only 8,000, I think.
But the entire south side of Rollins at the time I
was growing up was Mexican, Mexican-American.
And these were Mexicans primarily who had come
over from old Mexico and settled. Because we made a
distinction between, we called them suramacos.
You're probably familiar with the term. This is
people who came from Mexico to the United States.
And los manitos, who were Mexicans from New Mexico
or Colorado. who migrated to Rollins. So we made a
distinction between Mexican-Mexican Americans
and American-Mexican Americans. No, I don't
think I've heard those terms, but that may be...
Sudomato. S-U-R-U-M-A-T-O.
And this is from a hacienda in Michoacán.
And this is the name they gave themselves to
indicate their Mexican origin. And Los
Magnitos... There's a publication on Manico
culture. And these are Spanish people who live in
New Mexico and southern Colorado, who have been in
the country probably for hundreds of years, and
their descendants, perhaps, of Spanish and
Indians, or perhaps are of Mexican lineage, but
their forebears came over considerably before
the Sudamatos, from whom I'm descended. Yeah, but
it was perhaps in the late 19th century. Or early,
you know, I don't know, you know, maybe the Mexican
War. I just don't know, but I knew, though, that the
distinction was made when I was growing up. And the
most cutting thing we could say about another
Mexican was that he was a manito, you see, because
we wanted to indicate that we were really the best
Mexicans because our parents had just come over
from Mexico. Oh, that's interesting. Yeah, it is.
You know, we discriminated against ourselves
amongst ourselves as well. You mentioned an
hacienda in Michoacán as having given sura matos.
Suru. The way I've got it spelled.
It may be this. Yeah, this right here. Now, I got
this information from a publication by Manuel
Gamil. Are you familiar with some of his works? I
think that's where I got it. Something I've read,
though, explained the origin of this term, which I
knew from the time I was very young, but I didn't
know what it was. I just thought, You know, they're
from Missouri, you know, from South Mexico. This
isn't it. He says that this was from a hacienda.
This is the name of a hacienda in Michoacán. And
apparently it became
a concept or a symbol to indicate the origin of
these people in the United States who had come
directly from Mexico rather than being of Mexican
descent, you know, filtered through several
generations who had lived in the country before
them. Well, this is interesting because I've
never picked up either one of these terms from East
Texas or South Texas. There wouldn't be very many
people from New Mexico. There would be Texans who
were here, Tejanos who were here before the Texas
Revolution, many of them. But I wonder, there may
be a very real geographical difference here in the
use of terms. Now, again, I wish I had the source at
my fingertips. I think it's got me, but it may be
somewhere else. But in the literature... There is
the term, surumato, and they say it's from a
hacienda in Michoacan. Now, this I've got from the
literature. Someone has got, maybe it's Campa,
Maynard Campa has done something about it.
Someone, you know, it is in the literature. I was,
well, I've already apologized for not being able
to read the explanation. Well, what, how many of
the people in your hometown were from Michoacan? I
don't know. I don't know. I don't know. We had, I
suppose that we didn't have very many friends
because my uncle's family was a large one and my
mother's family, you know, and I suppose our
primary friendship, my first memories of any sort
of socialization with cousins, you know. But our
friends, I suppose, were the Macias, who were also
from Old Mexico,
Los Canos from Old Mexico, I suppose these were the
closest friends we had. I don't know where they
were from, except that they were from old Mexico
and maybe from where my parents came from. If you
look at the map, it meets La Barca and Hacona aren't
too far apart. No, they're not. Isn't Hacona where
Cardenas loves it or Cardenas is from? I don't
know. I don't know. There was no talk of kindness?
Oh, my father, yes, yes. But no, not in a reasonable
sense, you know. But kindness, you know, in my
father's hierarchy of values would rank very high
before I had any formal education at all. You know,
kindness was present in the 34th and 40th, you
know. I knew about him just as much as I knew about
Abraham Lincoln. These were in my pantheon of
heroes. And so my father, as I mentioned, was very
prideful of his ancestry and background, and was
extremely proud of what Cardenas had done. And I'm
quite sure I may be intellectualizing and reading
into the record something that wasn't there, but
it seems to me that he was very proud of the
expropriation. And any time the gringos got out,
my father was very happy. And yes, there was
knowledge, pride, even in Aleman, you know, just
because he's a Mexican president. But not
regional pride, but he may well have been from
Michoacan. Oh, he was from Michoacan. I wasn't
sure at the time. Your father kept up with events in
Mexico. Did your mother pay any attention?
Listen, I've... No, mom was sort of home,
housewife-oriented. My father, my mother,
again, this is probably post-facto research, has
said that apparently, she said, well, you get your
ability to speak in public from your father. And
apparently, on Mexican holidays, they would have
a gathering. My father would give talks, and other
people would give talks. So I have deduced from
this that he was illiterate in the formal sense,
although he could read and write. But I would
consider him to be sort of an intellectual in the
sense of trying to place himself in a larger role,
being aware of public events. Writing poetry, he
wrote poems, love poems to my mother, which is
something I suppose all of us do, but to have a man of
that background, I think, indicates that he did
have an interest in education, sympathy, which
probably couldn't be said about a great many of his
contemporaries. Your father was predominantly
of Spanish background. No, no. My father was very,
very dark, very Indian. He was very Indian. Was he
Tarascon, perhaps? Or do you know what? I don't
know. Here's a picture of my mother and my uncle
Tony. You see? Mm-hmm. He's a Haute-A-Tahiti.
They took off the Tahiti and made it
Haute-A-Tahiti when he was in the United States.
Wow.
My father was very Indian. If there's someone...
Now, look, this... Fine, thank you. Now, this is
the only thing I have from my father's...
These clippings and everything in here are his,
and this sort of argument is the point I'm making
about his interest. Was he actually from the town
of La Barca, or was he from a rancho nearby? That
might make a difference. I don't know. La Barca is
all I know. I know that there are some towns there.
Los Altos de Jalisco is near there. I just glimpsed
this thing. Well, go ahead, if I find it all. I
thought I had a small picture, which I had glued in
here years and years ago. But no, he was not
primarily Spanish. I think he was mestizo,
obviously. And it was quite dark. But
linguistically, fully Spanish. Oh, fluent. And
he commanded it. As the Spaniards say, he was a
dominio all the way. Spoke it very well. I'm
curious about the manifestation of prejudice in
Wyoming. Was it something that you sensed very
greatly as a child? Yes, yes. We were all sent, you
know, we had a Mexican school. Now, this was
explained, this was geographic, but as quickly as
we got to the fifth grade, you know, we all went to
the central school. And...
I don't know. I grew up hearing the dirty Mexican
bit, the greaser. What else were some of the
things? We all carried knives. All the
stereotypes that you associate with prejudice
were there. And we became very conscious at some
early age, obviously, because I can remember
being conscious of being Mexican all my life in a
defensive sense.
I don't know the source. He's the one who put it in.
Did your family remain Catholic? Oh, yes. I am a bad
one, but I'm
Catholic. You know, it's stuff that a laborer...
of that vintage wouldn't survive. Church
situation throughout the states of Mexico. In
other words, he was concerned with things. Yes,
yes. And he was very proud of what the Revolution
accomplished in the long run. Yeah, yeah. Did he
ever think of going back to Mexico? No. He
talked of going away from Wyoming, but he said he'd
like to live in Ogden, Utah, or Stockton,
California, or Portland, Oregon, each of these
towns he had lived in in his younger days when he was
with the railroad or something like this. But
never talked about going back to Mexico. And I
think that a great deal of the hesitancy that my
family has in owning up to their Mexitanness comes
from this instilling at a very early age on the part
of my mother more than my father. somehow a reserve
against Mexico, even though he's very proud of
what they've done. He never said, I want to go back
to visit. I don't believe it. He would fantasize
about the food and the fruits they would have. But
never going back for a visit, nor to live. Which
leads me to believe that maybe he did have a family
back then, you know, and would be reluctant to go
back for that reason. Because he didn't, as far as
you know, have the same kind of traumatic
experience that your mother is a 13-year-old.
It's easy to see how she would have that. Well, you
see, at the time of the Revolution, he would
already have been a young man. I suppose a man,
given the standards of that age, he would have
been... If you take 1910 as the starting point. He
was younger than his brother, who was with Villa.
And that's what would perhaps put him into this
kind of camp following situation. I've deduced
this for myself, both from my recollections and
from what my cousins told me
about him. It's very intriguing, and I don't want
to pursue it much more, because I'm sure the truth
isn't going to be as nice as my imagination. But I
tried to give you a factual account of what I
remember and not make them heroes of the
revolution or anything like that. You talked
about how you have not been to Mexico except
Juarez.
But you did live in South America. Yes, I lived in
Lima. I was a Fulbright professor at the Catholic
University in 1967. How did you feel about Peru?
Well, I had ambivalent feelings about it. It was a
tremendous professional opportunity. I enjoyed
being in the Spanish culture for the first time in
my life. It was very palpable. I enjoyed it. It
forced me to renovate my own Spanish. I think the
only reservation I had is I had my family with me,
which were two young sons at the time, and my wife,
who doesn't, you know, she can speak Spanish. She
doesn't dominate it. And so I was constantly
worried about little niggling details. I think
had I been there by myself or just she and I there
together, it would have been a much more enjoyable
experience. But I think that professionally,
intellectually, it really was a marvelous
experience. But as a family man, as a concerned
father, I wouldn't want to go back there under
those conditions again. You know, how old were
your sons then? Well, this picture was taken when
they were in Lima. Clayton was four, and Bobby was
nine. When we got back, he was ten. He was five. Now,
I still haven't found out, except perhaps some
genes, how you happened to get into college. How
did you determine to go? I
can't explain it. rationally, because there are
so many things. I was always very conscious of
being Mexican-American and resenting the fact
that somehow other people were better than us. I
suppose I was defensively aggressive, and still
am to a certain extent. And I suppose in a certain
amount of wanting to go to college was sort of a show
them kind of thing. But then I always remember
reading
I had a library card in my hometown library when I
was seven, eight years old. As quickly as I could
get it, I had it. So I've always had sort of a
bench for books. I've enjoyed it. And I think this
had a great deal to do with it. I can't explain where
did this come from. Where did you go to college? I
began at the University of Wyoming. And then I
transferred to Utah State University. And don't
ask me why, because it's another one of those
things I can't really explain rationally. Except
that I was doing more drinking and running around
and studying, and I wanted to get away from the
crowd of boys who were high school buddies. How did
you finance it? GI Bill. And I was a janitor at Sears
and Roebuck for a couple of years. So when were you
in the service? Korean War, 1950, 1954. And then as
soon as you got out, you started college. GI Bill.
But did you go straight on for a doctorate? Yes. I
finished my undergraduate
in three years, three and a half, third years. And
then I got a fellowship at Stanford. I got my
master's at Stanford. And I got a fellowship
there, but unfortunately no waiver of tuition, so
I had to get some financing. By this time I was
married and had a boy. Where's your wife from?
She's from Ohio. And she's... She's a gringa.
She's a gringa. And then I got my PhD here in
Colorado. So it's working all the way through
until... until graduate school. And then in
graduate school I got a very good... fellowship
first year as a Wilson, you know, not the school.
The Ford Foundation had to move the business. I
hadn't moved well. And then I got the fellowship
years at Colorado and the teaching
assistantship. And so that financed my way
through. I'm really very fortunate, you know, all
the way through by having help, you know, from the
government and then, you know, the people who gave
me jobs. There was a, if there's one